
Space weather

Space weather is the field of study that comprises all dynamic effects directly generated by the Sun in its domain of influence, that is, the heliosphere. Naturally, the focus is especially on the solar effects observed on Earth and its local environment, that is, the magnetosphere.



Like the terrestrial weather, space weather beschäftigt sich on similar time scales (days and weeks).


Most effects are introduced through the solar impact on the magnetosphere, ionosphere, or upper atmosphere (correct? LEO drag due to flare heating?).



Notable effects are:
- Stronger aurorae even at lower latitudes.
- Impact on animal navigation, such as birds and whales.
- Notable direct risks for humans are enhanced radiation doses during polar flights and especially for humans outside the atmosphere in orbit/space.


Notable impacts on technical systems are increased GNSS positioning errors, disturbances in satellite communications and in radio signals, power grid outtages, increased corrosion of long conducting things, such as oil pipelines, rail tracks, and power lines, increased satellite drag in low Earth orbits, faulting satellite electronics.


Notable effects on the rest of the solar system bodies:
- stripping of cometary tails
- enhanced atmospheric losses
- impacts on other planetary magnetospheres
- modulated cosmic radiation
- changing shape and size of the heliosphere




There exist several independent effects from different causes, occurring on different time scales:

underlying effects:
- geomagnetic storms
- substorms
- TEC impacts (from flares)
- cosmic radiation (Forbush decreases)


major causes:
- X"~ray flares
- CMEs
- solar wind streams
- SEPs


Most space weather effects are connected with economic interests and some impacts on technical systems can even influence human lives. This creates a strong interest in forecasting the space weather.
As space weather is a relatively new field of study and technical systems become increasingly vulnerable to its effects, basic research and development of prediction methods go hand in hand, pushing and benefitting from each other (cite...).

There exist lots of dedicated institutions and a multitude of forecasting techniques for the different aspects of space weather.

Predictions of magnetospheric disturbances are based on knowledge of the solar wind properties, which the magnetosphere will encounter. Thus in a first step, forecasting methods have to predict the solar wind at Earth in advance and derive its expected impact on the magnetosphere in a second step. The first part of this study contributes to the second step with predicting the amplitude of magnetospheric disturbances caused by solar wind. The basic structure of the magnetosphere, its coupling to the solar wind, and how disturbances are quantified/measured is described in the following sections. Existing solar wind and geomagnetic disturbance forecasting methods are described in sect~XX.



Magnetosphere

In first-order approximation, the terrestrial magnetic field can be seen as a dipole, aligned with the rotation axis of the Earth. There is only a small tilt of about XX~degree between both axes that varies over the years and the magnetic south pole is located near the geographic North Pole.


field strength surface to outside; equator to poles 30/60~µT
field extends outwards

pressure balance

size of cavity

bow shock, tail





locations of reconnection

opening and closing flux rate

influx of solar wind plasma

current system

auroral ovals

plasmoids

geomagnetic storms
substorms






	Solar-wind coupling




	Geomagnetic indices



	Kp index



Forecast methods


	CME forecast


	Stream forecast



	Kp forecast





space weather
magnetosphere
	Solar-wind coupling
	Geomagnetic indices
	Kp index
Forecast methods
	CME forecast
	Stream forecast
	Kp forecast


